---
title: "The Principle of Self-Acceptance"
date: 2024-11-05
image: "/images/cat self-acceptance.jpg"
tags: [principles, movement, being, body-mind, empowerment]
type: posts
---

# The Principle of Self-acceptance
## Ideals hurt
We often live our lives in resistance to what is. Always trying to change something to become something other than we are. If we look deeply into this activity of changing what we are, we will find, in the vast majority of cases, that at the heart of this activity is an **ideal**. And at the heart of that ideal is a **judgment** that something isn't right, something isn't okay, something is wrong with us; our minds, our bodies or life in general. 

In seeking to resolve this sense of wrongness; we look into the world and we see others that seem to have life figured out better than us. And we say, "Hey, I want to look like that, I want to feel like that, I want to be that." And so we have this image in our mind that we use to measure ourselves against. And we never quite hit the mark, do we? An ideal is always based on non-acceptance of the present moment and an image of a better future. Can you see this is a recipe for suffering? An ideal doesn't project us towards a bright future. It punishes us for not being there already.
## You are complete
In truth, you are **complete** as you are. From a place of completeness we may notice many things in our experience that are not quite how we want them to be. The good news is we can improve our experience. However, if we do not first and foremost accept ourselves exactly as we are, any attempt to change based on an ideal will be overshooting the present moment as it is. So any strategy for change isn't based on an authentic experience of the present moment. 

We will always miss the mark because we are reinforcing the belief in wrongness, which simply isn't true. Your existence is enough; you do not need to become anything other than you are. So before we get started on any kind of process of change, we need to take time to **be** what we are, *warts and all*. In any case we need to revisit this activity often, checking in: where am I overshooting? what am I resisting? what am I telling myself? We need to come back to this daily, maybe multiple times a day, to just be and accept who, what and where we are. And in the context of movement, this can look like freely moving our bodies and finding that sweet spot of total acceptance of self, body and the present moment as it is. Allowing every movement to be nourishing, opening, healing. This sets the foundation for true and effective change. 
And any strategy that we take from here will be vastly more effective than one based on ideals. Moving from self-acceptance we can experiment with any technique or modality - and there are many good ones - and put it to good use. We're already whole and complete, we're just waiting for reality to catch up with this truth. We may experience many things we'd like to change about our experience, but we are approaching them with commitment, focus, intent and openness and a naïve curiosity. 
## Fixed Realities
Self-acceptance puts us in an honest relationship with what's true. Instead of living in reaction to our pain and suffering and struggle, we are moving towards it; being honest about it. Being open to an experience beyond the "known" is essential for any change process. For what is known is fixed; and no amount of action will change a fixed reality. However, if we open up beyond what is known, then we can see the foundational components of our suffering; we begin to see what gives our suffering its existence. Without this clear seeing we are likely to run in circles, chasing ideals and reacting to our fixed, conceptual limitations; never quite being where we are. 

By putting our attention on the pain without resistance, and being open to something beyond the pain - being open to experiencing the truth of the matter, getting honest with ourselves about it, about what it's made of, what emotions are there, what thoughts are there; wrapping ourselves around the pain, feeling its edges, getting the whole thing *as it is*, without trying to fix or alter it in any way - we can deepen our understanding, deepen our experience of everything that is involved in our pain. From here, we can explore the edges, the boundaries of this pain, where else it's connected to in the body or in our lives. Gently exploring, moving, mapping it out with an openness and curiosity. 
## Victimhood or Empowerment?
What we come to recognise is that we are not victims of our pain, but our pain and suffering is something we are *doing*, albeit unconsciously. Much of what ails us is resolved through seeing what we are up to and ceasing to engage in such activities. We may find that there's nothing to resolve, or we may find that resolution happens through the process of exploration, acceptance and letting go.

Acceptance, honesty, openness and commitment are the keys to transformation. You are a powerful being who is capable of much more than you realise. Trying to be something you are not whilst denying what you are is a key for a fractured consciousness and a life of pain and struggle. Setting goals from a place of complete self-acceptance and aligning to those goas as if they are already true is the key to an empowered life. 
## Self-Acceptance in Practice
### Thoughts
Adopting the principle of self-acceptance offers the possibility of training a new way of being. We can take on a commitment of **intending** to accept ourselves for 15 (or 5) minutes a day. Everything we do for those 15 minutes will be aligned to this principle. How we move, how we breathe, how we think, how we feel. We can become conscious about everything we're thinking, doing and feeling that is *counter* to this principle and start to inquire into the nature of these activities. If, for example I notice that the contents of my internal dialogue is of me having a conversation with another in the future, I can ask what's true about this conversation. I may discover that I'm coming from a superior place (or defensive, or whatever). I can ask, what's the nature of *me being superior to others in the future*? Using **existential thinking** (looking into the nature of how something comes exist) I realise that I must hold it that I am in some way inferior *now*. Otherwise why do I need a future in which to be superior? Lets take a look another level down: What must be true for me to be inferior (and also for there to be such a thing as superior)? Well there must be an assumption of a value system, intrinsic to life. It doesn't take a tremendous amount of life-experience to realise that values are entirely made up and vary to a greater or lesser degree depending on context and culture. 

Letting go of these cultural assumptions is not easy. When using existential thinking it is a trap to settle for a conclusion. Seek instead an authentic experience of how the thought, assumption, belief, disposition lives in you. But even that isn't enough, we must also unstick the glue that binds the thought to us. 
### Emotions
There is always an emotional component attached to these perception-limiting thoughts that facilitates a *need* to think them; to view life through their lens. So in our practice of aligning to the **self-acceptance principle** we must also identify the emotional need to hold onto and live through these thoughts. 10,000 repetitions of us seeing how we're doing our own pain empowers us to (eventually) let them go. You can drop these painful dispositions quickly, once seen, but chances are it will take a lot of practice. Don't be discouraged though; as you learn how painful they are to live through, and as you become increasingly conscious of how and why you're participating in such activities, dropping them becomes a no-brainer. Again, it's just a matter of reality catching up to the truth. And once you've dropped one you open up more possibility for yourself to drop more. With each "dropping" you become more skilful at noticing how they live in you and confident that you can take on greater challenges. 
### Truth
As we become more skilful at dropping such thoughts, and feeling their accompanying emotions, it's as if the principle of self-acceptance floods in to take the place of those previously limiting identities. So don't forget to keep one eye on self-acceptance throughout this endeavour. It is possible to become conscious that your true nature exists "prior" to any cultural ideals.

***You are**. Ideals aren't!*

This is true freedom and it all starts with ***self-acceptance***. 

I wish you the fullness of an empowered life. May these words serve to guide **you** back to **you**. 

Gus
